An Explanation on How all the Scripts in run_analysis.R Work and How they are Connected

Starting with unzippig the zip file, UCI HAR Dataset.zip. After that, setting the directory onUCI HAR Dataset, the unzipped file. Show how traindata is formed: c subject_train, y_train, and x_train files, under the train folder, were being read as tables by read.table()function and binding them as columns through cbind() function. The same also applies for testdata as shown on the succeeding lines.

To merge the training and the test sets to create one data set called data, we run data <- rbind(train_data, test_data).

To appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names, line 14 shows that we will make use features.txt to be read as table and subsetting its second column which has the 561 variables being observed. Setting the column names of data to be "Subject_ID", "Activity_Category", followed by the observed variables (stored in features).

To extract only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement, we will make a data frame called mean_sd (containing 10299 observations with 68 variables) which is formed by binding the first two columns of data, the columns having the names which mathces to the word such as mean or standard deviation through the grepl() function.

To use descriptive activity names to name the activities in the dataset means we need to transform the numbers 1-6 (found in Activity_Category column) into the name of the activity being reffered: 1-WALKING, 2-WALKING_UPSTAIRS, 3-WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, 4-SITTING, 5-STANDING, and 6-LAYING. We need first to read activity_labels.txt as tables and set its column names. Next, the aim of the for loop is that if the ith element of the second column of data, Activity_Categry, is equal to the jth element of activity_names' first column, then the jth element of activity_names' second column will be assigned to ith element of the second column of data. The inner for loop iterates six times while the outer for loop iterates 10299 times. This is now a tidy data contaning train and test sets.

To create a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject, we will use the dplyr package. With the use %>% symbol, we can perform functions on the data frame in a more convenient way. Next, error concerning the uniqueness of the column names arise so we set the names of the data frame to be true. Then, we will group the data by Subject_ID, Activity_Category and finally, we will get the average of each variable. This new data set contains 180 observations with 563 variables.